# Page 1
State Rural Drinking Water Policy 2026
Government of Maharashtra
Water Supply and Sanitation Department
Government Decision No: Grapadho-2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
7th Floor, Gokuldas Tejpal Hospital Complex,
Lokmanya Tilak Marg, Mantralaya, Mumbai-400 001
Date: 25th June, 2026
Read: -
1) Central Government Guidelines for Jal Jeevan Mission Programme Month of December 2019
2) Government Decision, Water Supply and Sanitation Department, No: JJMI 2019 / Q. No.138 / Papu-07
Date 04/09/2020.
3) Letter from the Central Government No. Do not. W- 1101/49/2021 -Water-DDWS-Part1, d. 24/09/2025
4) "Guidelines for States in line with the Maintenance Correction Policy" received from the Central Government.
(Guidelines for the preparation of O&M Policy for the States/UTs)
5) The Cabinet of Ministers. History of the meeting on 16/06/2026
Proposal
National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) launched by the Government of India from 2009-10
The Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) has been restructured by the Central Government.
The Jal Jeevan Mission in the state is an ambitious one as per the guidelines released on 25.12.2019.
The program is being implemented. Individual tap connections to all households in rural areas of the state
Supply of at least 55 litres of quality water per person per day through connections by 2024
"Har Ghar Nal Se Jal" (Piped Water Supply) - This is the Jal Jeevan Mission for every household in rural areas.
were the main objectives. However, the Union Cabinet Water life according to the recognition of the 10/03/2026
The mission programme has been extended till December 2028. The state of the program
Regarding the implementation of No. 02 here. Guidelines under Government Decision on 04.09.2020
Notifications have been issued. Reformative of old schemes under Jal Jeevan Mission in the state
The total average rural tap capacity is 51,560 with retrofitting and new water supply schemes.
Water supply schemes are being implemented. Before the launch of the Jal Jeevan Mission, the Chief Minister
Drinking Water Programme, Jal Swarashtra Programme, as well as National Rural Drinking Water Programme, etc., sponsored by the Centre and the States.
Schemes for providing water supply to households / households in rural areas of the state under the programme.
were being implemented. 2000, pursuant to the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments to the Constitution of India.
The government adopted a policy of implementing "demand-based" schemes for the water supply sector from
# Page 2
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
According to this policy, after the approval of the scheme for the local bodies and the completion of the works of the scheme,
After the implementation of the scheme, the concerned local bodies or their committees or
Maintenance of the scheme by transferring it for day-to-day maintenance repair to Maharashtra Jeevan Authority.
A policy to provide 100% of the cost of repairs through water-logging by the respective beneficiaries.
is applicable. Local bodies cannot afford the cost of maintenance and repair of water supply schemes.
And since the beneficiaries lack the mindset and financial capacity to fill the water table at an increased rate.
The maintenance and repair costs of the plan are not self-balancing. A variety of activities carried out by the department
Expenditure incurred on rural water supply programmes and accordingly sanctioned in the last few years.
The water supply schemes were reviewed at the divisional level and the maintenance and repair of the schemes were carried out.
Not working properly, power supply being cut off due to pending power bills, regular maintenance
The closure of the scheme due to various reasons, such as lack of trained manpower for repairs, etc., or at full capacity.
There have been instances of non-functioning.
A large number of new schemes have been approved under Jal Jeevan Mission.
Therefore, for the sustainable operation of these schemes and the capital expenditure incurred on them,
The state has made it comprehensive as these schemes need to be continued for a long period of time to meet the objective.
National Jal Jeevan Mission, Jal Shakti to approve and implement such maintenance repair policy
There are directions from the Ministry, Government of India. Also, under reference No. 4 of the guidelines here.
Centre to implement comprehensive maintenance overhaul policy covering mandatory 19 points
Suggestions have also been given from time to time in the review meetings held by the government. For this reason, or
From the perspective of the overall situation and outlook of the state in the field of rural water supply and sanitation.
Accordingly, the issue of a comprehensive policy was under consideration of the government. In accordance with this, or
The Department proposes to frame a "State Rural Drinking Water Policy 2026." the State Cabinet
D. has been approved in the meeting on 16/06/2026.
The Government's Decision
The issues covered under the policy are not limited to maintenance repairs of water supply schemes.
Rural drinking water is also relevant to a more important and broader topic.
Also, proper maintenance is required for successful implementation of rural water supply programmes.
Correctional policy, mechanisms and strengthening thereof, appropriate water table recovery,
Sustainability and development of water resources, eco-friendly use of resources, sanitation and wastewater management,
Pollution control, use of renewable energy, etc. are interrelated with this implementation.
2 out of 49 pages
# Page 3
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
They appear to be interdependent. For this reason, the policy only covers maintenance repairs.
To address the long-term objectives of the overall rural water supply programme without limiting it to the subject matter.
It was decided to come out with a more comprehensive "State Rural Drinking Water Policy." the past
Continuous change in monsoonal climate due to climate change, global warming, etc. over the years.
Also, in view of the loss of groundwater resources due to overuse, drinking water in rural areas
The priority of the present day is to provide sustainable solutions to the needs and its related matters.
It's important to be relevant. Clean water is also sixth in the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
The number is given as the main target. Drinking water supply in rural areas
The comprehensive policy of the state related to the program is being implemented through this government decision.
Reference No. 4 Compulsory 19 points included in the Central Government guidelines here
This has been done in the policy. Maintenance and repair of water supply schemes in the state.
Sustainable management of the water supply and sanitation sector as a whole, in line with operations.
Accordingly, the following are covered under this policy:
Objectives and scope of Jal Jeevan Mission in the state:
The state has been implementing the centrally sponsored Jal Jeevan Mission programme since September 2020.
Under this programme, every household in every village of the state will have a "functional household tap connection."
By providing Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC), the goal of "Har Ghar Jal" has been achieved.
It has to be done. Under Jal Jeevan Mission, retrofitting of old schemes and
A total of 51,560 schemes are being implemented on an average such as New Water Supply Schemes. Sadar
The average 1,46,80 of 624 households in rural areas of the state through the scheme is 55 litres per household.
LPCD is defined as sustainable, pure, and compliant with the Bureau of Indian Standards water quality standards.
The aim of the scheme is to provide water supply taking into account the population by 2054. Water
Prior to the launch of Jeevan Mission, the Chief Minister's Drinking Water Programme, Jal Swarashtra Programme, National
84770 in rural areas of the state under centrally and state sponsored programmes, rural drinking water etc.
In villages, 48.43 tap connections were provided at a capacity of 40 litres per capita (LPCD).
However, under the Jal Jeevan Mission, water should be supplied in the quantity of 55 litres per capita (LPCD).
Therefore, all these schemes are being upgraded by re-investing.
The Jal Jeevan Mission scheme is being implemented through a financial partnership between the Government of India and the state governments.
and 50-50% under the general coverage component, as well as for assisted matters and water quality components.
The 60-40 percentage is the fund's share of this amount.
Page 3 of 49
# Page 4
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
Classification of tap water supply schemes in the state by source and circulation:
Classification by source: -
1) Terrestrial Sources - Sources of drinking water schemes are near dams, ponds, rivers and other water bodies.
The sources that are done are known as terrestrial sources.
2) Ground Water Sources - Water sources of drinking water schemes when taken up on wells / vindhan wells.
It is called a groundwater source.
3) Other Sources - Drinkable by treating water from waterfalls, springs, or the sea.
to do, etc.
3.2 Classification of tap water supply schemes by circulation: -
1) Single Village Water Supply Scheme - When water is supplied to a single village or Gram Panchayat
The schemes that are planned will be single village water supply schemes.
2) Multi-Gram Scheme / Regional Scheme - When there is water supply to more than one Gram Panchayat / Village
The schemes under which the scheme is prepared will be multi-gram / regional schemes.
3) Hybrid Model Tap Water Supply Scheme - When maintenance of the appendages of a scheme
Repair works are carried out by two systems, such as the Hybrid Model Tap Water Supply Scheme.
There will be.
Maintenance repair components of tap water supply schemes:
Water supply since 2000, pursuant to the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments to the Constitution of India
The government has adopted a policy of implementing "demand-based" schemes for the region. or
By determining the technical aspects of the scheme after demand from the local bodies as per the policy.
The schemes are given administrative approval after technical approval from the competent authority. "Based on demand"
Suggested testing of regional or single tap water supply schemes as required by the policy.
Over a period of time, the scheme is run by the contractor concerned and thereafter, the scheme becomes relevant.
Day-to-day maintenance with local bodies or their committees or with Maharashtra Life Authority.
are transferred for repair. Generally, the maintenance and repair cost of a water supply scheme is
There are mainly four components: -
(1) Wholesales supplied by Water Resources, Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation, etc.
Water payment charged for water supply.
(2) Establishment cost on the scheme.
4 out of 49 pages
# Page 5
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
(3) The cost of electricity payments.
(4) Day-to-day architectural and mechanical repairs of the scheme, as well as water purification and desalination.
The chemicals that are needed
The need for a drinking water policy:
With sustainable sources to create infrastructure for water supply schemes in the state.
A large amount of capital expenditure is invested. However, the waterline recovery and maintenance repair
Some plans close over time due to a lack or resource drying up. Other available sources
There is a demand from the local body for approval of new schemes. In the summer
Water is also supplied by tankers in bad weather conditions. Then again, the government
New plans have a financial burden. To make the spending on these schemes worthwhile in the long run.
Regularization of the scheme for sustainable and quality supply of drinking water from sanctioned schemes.
Maintenance needs to be repaired. Proper planning of water at the local body level
It is also important to avoid wastage of water. The source of each scheme is non-polluting and includes
Implementing various water conservation measures around the source to ensure adequate water resources are available.
Emphasis is laid on increasing the groundwater table through reuse of water within villages, as well as various eco-friendly measures.
Giving is in order. From proper financial planning to making the plan financially self-balancing, each
Local bodies are sustainable and self-sufficient in the maintenance of water supply schemes.
It should also be multi-skilled, trained for technical and other repairs of water supply schemes within the village.
Guidelines to field agencies for availability of manpower to each local body
It is necessary to give.
Objectives of the Maharashtra State Rural Drinking Water Policy 2026
The objectives of this policy are as follows: -
1) Equal supply of clean, safe and quality drinking water to all beneficiaries as per norms.
to do.
2) Formulate guidelines for self-sustainability of the scheme. Consolidated Funds and Depreciation Funds
Local water supply schemes to be implemented through medium as well as other sources of finance.
Financial empowerment of self-governing institutions.
3) Long-term efficiency, upgradation of infrastructure required for water supply schemes and
to ensure sustainability.
5 out of 49 pages
# Page 6
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
4) Local sustainability with the help of water recycling, resource recharge and renewal measures.
To further promote eco-friendly development.
5) Regular inspection of water sources and water supply schemes.
6) Innovative technologies in water supply systems e.g. SCADA, IoT, AI and other advanced technologies
Creating a conducive environment for consumption.
7) To coordinate the water supply system and provide citizens with a platform to address their concerns and grievances.
to make available.
8) Implementing a zero leakage policy for water supply schemes.
9) Standard operating procedures for maintenance repairs and water quality and other ancillary matters.
Developing Standard Operating Procedures.
10) Establishment of uniform guidelines for operation and maintenance repair of water supply systems.
to do.
11) Efficient utilization of resources of water supply schemes and affordable services to the citizens.
promoting distribution.
12) Improving the efficiency of maintenance, repair and management of water supply schemes as well as,
Functional skills and capacity building of manpower and stakeholders required for maintenance repair
To make them technically self-sufficient.
13) Removing inequality in distribution.
14) Preparation and implementation of water supply schedules.
15) Innovative factors affecting the quality, quantity and regularity of water supply.
to be included from time to time.
16) To inculcate a sense of ownership among the beneficiaries through awareness generation.
17) Plan-wise water budget, as well as taluka and district-wise water budget.
to do.
18) Efficient systems and efficient control for operation and maintenance repair of water supply schemes.
creating the system.
19) Catch the Rain, Where It Falls, When It Falls under various departments of the government according to the principle
Available Jalyukt Shivar, MGNREGA, Atal Bhujal Yojana, Catch the Rain, Shivkal Water
Dichotomy of schemes by convergence among the respective schemes to be taken up.
To promote avoidance and sustainable water conservation measures.
20) Conservation of pure drinking water sources in the state, preventing their pollution.
21) To take other measures as may be necessary for drinking water.
6 out of 49 pages
# Page 7
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
Use of existing resources before the new scheme:
Water supply schemes are sanctioned from time to time by the government / local bodies.
However, the depletion of the groundwater table was due to the failure of the old plan bridges due to the increased population.
In places where the water supply to the source of the tap scheme is deficient due to depletion or other natural causes.
A new plan is proposed. at the time of approving the new scheme.
Proper utilization of all functional components of the existing scheme and other available resources is a priority.
Geography of village roads and houses while providing internal tap connections for water supply.
The structure and position should be properly considered. Before starting the work of the water supply scheme in the area
Review of roads / drains and other development works and coordination with concerned agencies and authorities.
Work on water supply schemes should be started by keeping it. A water pipeline between the roads within the village
It should not be thrown away. so as to avoid damage to public property, such as the construction of roads
Matters will not be spent twice. Also, earlier transferred to the respective local bodies.
or public parts of the water supply scheme under the control of the local body.
It is the responsibility of the local body concerned to take care and maintain it from the point of view of safety.
All structural units in the transferred water supply schemes such as water tanks,
Conduct periodic structural audits of water treatment plants, pump houses, etc.
The local body concerned will be responsible for proper disposal of the damaged property.
so that the damage to public and living property caused by the collapse of such appendages can be avoided.
About the sources of water supply schemes:
The number of large lakes, dam reservoirs, and perennial rivers is low in the catchment areas of the state.
As such, most of the water supply schemes in the state are proposed to be based on groundwater.
have been observed. ubiquitous for well or vindhan well-based schemes.
After January / February, the water supply decreases, increasing the amount of water stagnation in the summer.
And it is up to the government to supply water through tankers to the area. Therefore, the government is angry with the people.
You have to be a victim. Also, double the cost of the scheme and the cost of the tanker should be borne by the government.
This is because water resources are assured and available throughout the year when new plans are made.
Choose the one. In exceptional circumstances if assured water resources are not available nearby
Water supply schemes should be sanctioned at groundwater sources such as wells / vindhan wells.
7 out of 49 pages
# Page 8
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
Models for operation, maintenance and repair management of tap water supply scheme:
Operation, maintenance of respective tap water supply schemes after transfer of scheme
Maintenance repairs and operations will be carried out according to local conditions in line with the repair.
a) Single Village Water Supply Scheme - Operation, maintenance of separate single village tap water supply schemes
And the entire responsibility of the repair will be of the concerned Gram Panchayat.
b) Multi-Gram / Regional Tap Water Supply Scheme (Hybrid Model) - Multi-Gram / Regional Tap Water Supply
Maintenance, Repair and Operation of In Village Infrastructure of Schemes.
The responsibility will lie with the respective Gram Panchayat and the out-of-village sub-groups that supply the bulk water supply.
(Out village / Bulk supply infrastructure) Responsible for maintenance, repair and operation of the respective district
The council or Maharashtra Life Authority will remain. According to this model, bulk water supply is provided outside the village.
Regularization of village water supply (ESR / GSR) by maintaining necessary equipments for the purpose.
The concerned Zilla Parishad or Maharashtra Life Authority shall ensure smooth availability.
Also, tap water supply from the village water tank to the citizen's house.
The concerned Gram Panchayat needs to take care of the smooth functioning. This is how it is ensured
Have a responsive maintenance and repair system in place and have a complete plan in place.
That system will be responsible for keeping it. Multigram or grid water supply schemes.
Water supply, with the responsibility of maintenance repairs to be given in some form to the Maharashtra Life Authority.
And separate guidelines will be issued by the Sanitation Department setting the criteria.
After the transfer of water supply schemes, one of the above mentioned models will be based on local conditions.
Concerned Gram Panchayats / Zila Parishads and Maharashtra Jeevan for implementation as per appropriate model.
There should be a clear agreement between the authorities. Under Village Under Water Supply Scheme (IN)
village infrastructure and out village / bulk supply
Infrastructure) Maintenance Repair Responsibility, Water Board Recovery System, Maintenance of Appendices
Allocation of funds / income collected by the watershed in accordance with the responsibility of the amendment, as well as the Finance Commission,
Allocation of funds from viability gap funding, and other available grants, and other ancillary
Provisions regarding the components should be included in the agreement. At the time of finalization of this Agreement
District Water and Sanitation Mission as well as District Technical Cell (DTU) functioning under it.
Come.
8 out of 49 pages
# Page 9
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
10. Transfer of tap water supply scheme:
Water being implemented by Zilla Parishad or Maharashtra Jeevan Authority under Jal Jeevan Mission
The supply plans were transferred to the local body concerned for their maintenance and repair.
However, the Regional Water Supply Scheme of the Maharashtra Jeevan Authority is Local Self Government.
Institutions or committees constituted by them or other bodies willing to implement such a scheme.
A transfer is possible. But for that, a memorandum of understanding should be signed between the respective agencies.
The transfer process is mainly carried out in the following stages in connection with the transfer of tap water supply:
It should be removed:
a) Completion and operationalization of water supply schemes as per the norms of Jal Jeevan Mission Programme.
After that, the test is determined according to the terms and conditions of the tender of the scheme.
It is mandatory for the contractor concerned to successfully execute the plan over a period of time.
b) Local bodies / implementing agencies associated with the scheme during this trial period.
the officer / employee in accordance with the terms and conditions of the tender for the said work and the corresponding provisions.
It is mandatory to run the plan jointly with the contractor. In the meantime, the officers / employees concerned
He / she should have knowledge of the technical and other details of the scheme, all the activities under the scheme in a proper capacity and
Ensuring running with quality by notifying the contractor if errors are found.
It is intended to ensure that repairs, etc. are made so that the local self-governments concerned with the scheme
It will be convenient to run the scheme efficiently once it is transferred to the institution / implementing agency and
Then there will be no controversy.
c) Completion of the trial period of the contractor as per the terms and conditions of the tender in accordance with the said schemes.
The process of physical transfer of the plan should be started 30 days before it is done. Related to the contractor of the project
In writing to the local bodies as well as the competent authorities of the scheme implementation mechanism.
Advice should be given in advance.
d) Completion of the successful trial period of the contractor in accordance with the terms and conditions of the project work tender
Such Single Village Schemes are concerned after being certified by the competent authority concerned.
Gram panchayats and multi-gram schemes will be transferred to the respective Zila Parishads.
e) The works have been completed as per the tender of the scheme or how and by the contractor before the transfer of the scheme.
Technical aspects related to successful completion of the trial period of the scheme or how
District Water and Sanitation in cases where doubts or complaints are raised by the local body.
The mission has to make a decision. In case of transfer of schemes, depending on the situation, some in rural areas of the state
The District Water and Sanitation Mission will be empowered to take a decision on the matter, if any. In regards to this
9 out of 49 pages
# Page 10
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
"District Technical Unit" (DTU) under Zila Parishads with respect to technical matters.
A report should be made. In such a case, within 15 days of inspection by the District Technical Cell.
The report should be submitted to the District Water and Sanitation Mission. Accordingly, the final decision on the transfer of the scheme
The procurement will be mandatory for the District Water and Sanitation Mission.
f) Inability of the respective local bodies to transfer the scheme during the said period.
Appointed by the Zilla Parishad to the local body concerned for such a single village scheme, if so indicated.
to the Member Secretary and to the Chief Executive Officer, Zilla Parishad concerned of the Multi-Gram Scheme.
shall be transferred and the said transfer shall be made in the manner prescribed by the aforesaid designated officer.
They will be obligated. Accordingly, the transfer and further responsibilities to the relevant agencies.
A contract should be made.
h) Plan after successful completion of the trial period by the contractor as per the terms and conditions of the tender
The transfer handbook with complete information about the scheme and details of the appendix is relevant at the time of transfer.
It will be mandatory to give to the local body. The project is executed by the contractor concerned.
In writing to the relevant implementation mechanism, the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) required to be put in place
It will be mandatory.
The Maharashtra Jeevan Authority plans by formulating a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for running the scheme.
Transfer to concerned local body and District Water and Sanitation Mission expeditiously.
It will be mandatory to make it available. One month in case such Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) is not available
should be made available inside. Sustainable water resources in conjunction with regional water supply schemes
Local self-government bodies and Maharashtra Life to ensure efficient management and water supply services.
There should be a joint agreement between the authorities. The agreement includes water supply management, regulatory
For compliance, water theft prevention, penal action, maintenance and financial sustainability.
Responsibilities should be clear.
The plan transfer booklet should contain the following information:
Original as well as revised administrative and technical approvals, name of the contractor, on the scheme
Expenditure incurred, original and revised budgets of the scheme, detailed technicalities of all components of the scheme
Information, architectural structures with details of plan appendices, used in architectural work
Day-to-day maintenance of materials and mechanical equipment, mechanical equipment / machinery, etc.
Manual for repairs, contract for maintenance repairs, flow-view of the plan
Page 10 of 49
# Page 11
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
All ancillary aspects such as the map, the land level of the appendix, etc. should be recorded in the transfer handbook.
Digitized information of all the components of the scheme will be used for this scheme.
Transparency, efficiency, and easy to troubleshoot problems. According to the government's policy
This infrastructure information should be digitized. Also, the transfer booklet, the standard
Providing relevant information like SOPs, etc. to local bodies, preferably in Marathi language.
A copy should also be provided.
As soon as possible after all the above mentioned aspects have been recorded in detail regarding the transfer of the scheme.
That is, the local self-government concerned at the first or second meeting after the transfer of the plan.
A decision in this regard should be taken within the organisation. All these procedures are followed properly in rural areas.
The Group Development Officer concerned will be responsible for controlling the same and others.
The place shall be occupied by the competent authority concerned.
Asset inventory and asset mapping:
All existing and newly constructed under tap water supply schemes.
It is necessary to register the properties. under each of the tap water supply schemes.
Registering, listing of appendices / properties, including these appendices / properties.
Responsible for keeping technical records of performance and for keeping these lists up to date from time to time.
In rural areas, the concerned Gram Sevak / Village Extension Officer and in other places, the competent authority will be there.
Geographic Information System for Accurate Property Registration, Maintenance, and Future Planning - GIS
Geographic Information System (GIS) and Information Management System (MIS)
technologies such as information systems) should be used. All in the property map
Geographical registry of water resources, water supply systems, water conservation projects and other infrastructure
It should be done in numerical form as per the prevailing policy of the government. each under the direction of the Central Government.
The property should be assigned a Unique Identification Number (UID). As well,
All properties should be geotagged along with all appendices of the plans. GPS / Other under the Scheme
Technology based on placement services should be used. All existing waterways, aqueducts, and
It will be the responsibility of the respective agencies to display the other appendices on the map. List of Assets
Inventory) and asset mapping followed by recording and
The final responsibility for the update will lie with the implementing agency.
11 out of 49 pages
# Page 12
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
13. Fixation of water tariff:
The various Finance Commissions of the past have focused on the social sector, particularly the water supply sector.
Subsidies to Panchayats for 'Management of Water Supply' in the form of grants-in-aid with emphasis
Priority is given. Moreover, water supply has been considered to be the main function of panchayats. Water supply service
collecting reasonable user fees for payments, revising their rates according to inflation,
Also, determine the waterline rate at which the cost of maintenance and repair of these services will be fully recovered.
Shifars have been made by the Finance Commission. 14th Finance Commission (2015-2020) Health, Education, Drinking Water
Water and sanitation are recognized as public services of national importance. The 14th Finance
The Commission defined sustainable water supply schemes under a 'formal management model'.
Passing, 100% household meters are installed, and the net from the water table and the subsidy is
The income is sufficient to meet the cost of operation and maintenance repair of the scheme. '
It is.
Plan-wise water table rates for self-sustaining schemes from an economic point of view
It needs to be determined. Maharashtra after tap water supply schemes were transferred to Gram Panchayats
As per Rule 80 of the Gram Panchayat Taxes and Fees Rules, 1960 (Part IX), as well as the Maharashtra Gram Panchayat
The cost of provision of water supply as per Clauses 8 and 12 under Section 124 of the Act, 1959
The right to determine the rate at which the waterline will be sufficient to supply and maintain it.
It belongs to the Gram Panchayat. If maintenance repairs cost more than a source of income, and thus water
In case of non-compliance of the supply plan, the concerned Gram Panchayat shall meet all the associated expenses.
to do so at a reasonable rate in exercise of the powers conferred on them by the Maharashtra Gram Panchayat Act.
Make sure. For this, the total tap connections / houses in the village and annual maintenance repairs will be done.
The following factors should be considered to balance the cost.
Local self-governments with regard to the cost of maintenance and repair of the scheme while determining the water table rate.
The objective is to make the institution / operating system financially self-sufficient by providing financial stability.
For this, the expenditure on maintenance and repair of the scheme in the respective village and the beneficiary houses under the scheme will be borne.
Number, total population of the village, number of household / family members, cattle owned by the family
Taking into account these factors, the cost of maintenance repairs will be 100% recovered and the plan streamlined.
The local body concerned should fix the water table rate so that it remains functional. This is the rate
Plan-wise schedule will be announced at the local body / Maharashtra Life Authority level.
Determination of tariff for domestic, institutional tap connections and commercial use of water lines.
12 out of 49 pages
# Page 13
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
The status quo will be the same for the respective independent local bodies / Maharashtra Life Authority. the above-mentioned
Fixation of rate of water band / water usage charge as per guidelines and recovery thereof.
Detailed guidelines on doing so should be issued by the Rural Development Department.
The average rate of water supply per kilolitre for rural water supply schemes under the Jal Jeevan Mission in the state is â €œwater for domestic useâ €
The minimum bar rate per family / household is Rs. 150 per family / household, subject to a maximum of Rs. Rs 400
So much is being determined. The respective local self-governments that own the water supply scheme
The institutions pay the actual maintenance and repair cost of the scheme per family / household, per month, or
Per family / household, Rs. Charging water tariff whichever is higher out of 150
It will be mandatory. Necessary legal action and notification in this regard by the Rural Development Department.
will be released. Also, the schemes run by the Maharashtra Jeevan Authority.
Accordingly, with the approval of the Board of Directors of the Maharashtra Jeevan Authority, the water tariff was fixed.
Come.
100% water band / water usage charge charged as per the prescribed rate.
The recovery will be binding on the local body concerned. the respective local self-government
In case of non-recovery of 100% of the catchment from the institutions or the catchment of the catchment.
If the fund is unable to cover the cost of maintenance repairs, it may be used to cover the shortfall.
The 15th / 16th Finance Commission funds with the respective local bodies are essentially water.
Supply plans should be used to pay for maintenance repair costs. Also, in accordance with the necessary funds
District Planning Development Committee funds, Zilla Parishad Cess and others from the respective local bodies.
The cost required for maintenance repairs should also be covered on priority from the funds available.
The Maharashtra Gram Panchayats Act 1959 on Gram Panchayats not complying with the directions as aforesaid.
Approval to take action as provided under section 145 as well as section 39C and other sections.
is being provided. The guidelines in this regard have been issued separately by the Rural Development Department.
Will come.
The amount of water table deposited by the local bodies as well as the compensation for the deficit.
15th / 16th Finance Commission funds or other available grants to be made.
Implementation Mechanism for the concerned Gram Panchayat and Maintenance Corrections as per the agreement (District
to be distributed and distributed among the Council / M.G.P.).
13 out of 49 pages
# Page 14
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
14. Viability Gap Funding:
Large geographical spread of the scheme, depending on actual site conditions and requirement.
Installation of extra-capacity electro-mechanical components leading to higher cost of electricity bills.
The overall cost of maintenance and repair of some schemes, as well as the corresponding amount of water, etc.
The cost per kilolitre of water may be higher. Local Self-Government Organization or Implementation
Deposits from agencies, maintenance repair funds, finance commission funds, or district planning.
Such schemes will also be funded from the Development Committee Fund, Zilla Parishad Cess and other such available resources.
It is not possible to cover the cost of maintenance repairs and these plans are discontinued due to lack of maintenance repairs in the future.
There is a risk of falling. For example, the cost per kilolitre of water for schemes
Water) for the respective local schemes which are higher than the overall average rate in the state.
Subsidies in the form of Viability Gap Funding should be made available to NGOs. In this regard
Schemes whose actual maintenance repair cost figures exceed the per-house waterline ceiling.
That is, Rs. For schemes that exceed 400, the maximum water tariff is more than the expected income.
By providing grants in the form of Viability Gap Funding for additional maintenance repair costs.
will be given. Necessary technical support is provided by the respective District Technical Units (DTUs) in connection with the grant.
The cost of water supply of the schemes by examining the factors as well as the maximum water table accordingly.
It will be necessary to standardize the rate fixation and determine the eligibility by evaluating the schemes. In regards to this
Separate procedures and rules will be issued by the department. Also, as mentioned above, Viability
Rural development is the funding provided to rural local bodies in line with Gap Funding.
The grant should be provided from the grants made available by the department. Also, as well, in the run by M.G.P.
Subsidies in the form of Viability Gap Funding for upcoming projects Water Supply and Sanitation
will be provided by the department.
15. Water tariff levies and exemptions:
Charging the waterline to the customer monthly or otherwise as per requirement.
Payments should be made to the respective user. Domestic / Personal, Commerce, Education while fixing rates
Different rates may be fixed for institutions, government / non-government organizations, etc. the commerce and
From the tapping point if the non-governmental organization wants to provide a new tap connection.
It will be mandatory for the customer to make a provision for the expenses incurred towards the building / house of the customer. Home
14 out of 49 pages
# Page 15
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
It also allows commercial customers to charge a fixed security deposit while getting a new tap connection.
The Gram Panchayat will have the power to decide the amount.
Also, in the water tariff for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections.
The local body concerned shall have the power to grant the concession. However, by giving such a discount
The shortfall in water tariff collection is the other available with the local body concerned.
The payment should be made from financial sources so that it does not affect the operation and performance of the scheme.
16. Appointment and maintenance of biomass repair contracts:
Maintenance, repair and day-to-day operation of water supply schemes in the respective district.
Accordingly, the Gram Panchayats are provided with an enabling mechanism at the Taluka level.
Technically competent systems should be empanelled. the Divisional Department of the concerned Department
Technical Qualified Institutions / Agencies functioning at such Taluka level through Commissioner's Office.
The empanelment should be done and the list should be made available to the Gram Panchayats. or
"District Technical Cell" in line with the technical aspects of water supply schemes in the process.
Technical Unit (DTU) guidance and assistance may be sought. These are nominated by the Gram Panchayats in the district.
Choose the right organization from among the organizations according to your plan's capabilities. In regards to this
The Rural Development Department should act as a coordinating mechanism.
Distribution, collection and disbursement of fixed water table payments for water supply schemes.
To the concerned local bodies / enforcement agencies for maintenance repair work.
Biomechanics can also be employed. In line with this work, women's self-help groups within the village
Primary Agricultural Cooperative Credit Societies (PACS) should be considered. Distribution and recovery work
It is necessary to be encouraged to be efficient. Accordingly, the local body concerned
Determine the criteria. To approve maintenance repair contract budgets and contracts.
The powers will be vested in the Committee under Local Self Government / Maharashtra Life Authority, as the case may be.
Maintenance and repair cost of schemes in Gram Panchayats in respective areas, water table recovery rate
Plans for villages in / around an area by examining their economic viability in this regard.
The power to jointly administer and appoint a single competent authority for the same shall be vested in the District Water and Sanitation Board.
The cleanliness mission will continue.
Trained multi-skills available to maintenance repair contractor under Jal Jeevan Mission
It will be mandatory to use manpower (tap water mitras). Local self-government 15 out of 49
# Page 16
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
Organizations / Implementing Agencies to maintain the scheme, repair and restore the catchment areas.
If appointed, payments to buy systems will be performance-based. Maintenance Repair
The bi-systems will be responsible for maintaining the balance of the schemes during the tender / contract period and
Failure to do so will result in a penalty charge, a provision for termination of the contract,
The inclusion in the tender / contract will be mandatory. Bye system was appointed throughout the scheme.
If so, they are allowed to take a local deposit of not less than one month.
The maintenance of the autonomous body will be with the Corrections Committee / Maharashtra Life Authority.
Performance-based incentives:
Improvement in quality, efficiency while implementing tap water supply schemes in rural areas.
Performance-based to promote the success of improvement, water and sanitation management
The incentive scheme will be launched by the respective administrative departments:
a) by the local self-government bodies or by-agents appointed by them for the purpose of collection of water table.
Recovery of 70% to 80% of the catchment demand is 0. 5% and more than 80% of the catchment.
If done, an incentive subsidy of 1 per cent of the recovery will be provided. If the waterline recovery is less than 70 per cent
No incentive subsidy should be given. Also, the designated mechanism is penalized for inefficiency.
The authority to take action shall be vested in the concerned district and taluk level committee. Incentive of the above
The subsidy should be given on the amount of the catchment actually received.
b) Water supply quantity, quality, zero to improve the functioning of each tap water supply scheme.
Leakage, Supply System Management, Delivery Efficiency, Customer Service, Grievance Redressal Management
System, water conservation, wastewater and human waste management, etc., of each Gram Panchayat on the basis of criteria.
will be assessed. The concerned Zila Parishad and Maharashtra Jeevan Authority have done well.
Funds in the form of financial assistance / grants-in-aid for improvement and efficiency of tap water supply system on a regular basis.
will be provided. The concerned local self-government institutions, Gram Sevaks for the best performance in the scheme.
Appropriate awards, certificates, and mementos should be presented from the district and taluka levels. Performance-Based
Incentive scheme improves overall water and sanitation management efficiency, rural quality of life
Improvement, less water leakage and more incentives to Gram Panchayats for their water management systems.
The performance is based on zero complaints from citizens regarding tap water supply services.
The main objective behind the incentive is. Funds from the corpus fund of the respective Gram Panchayats for this purpose.
Or the expenditure should be made from the available funds of the Zilla Parishad.
16 out of 49 pages
# Page 17
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
18. Creation of Emergency Response and Disaster Management Framework for Water Supply Schemes:
Conservation of water resources and continuity of water supply during natural or man-made disasters.
To be maintained, each Gram Panchayat shall be administered by the District Relief and Rehabilitation Department.
Create an emergency response, training, and disaster management plan. The district is
The help of the council's water supply department should be sought.
19. Schedule and publication of water supply:
For schemes at every local body level or from the Maharashtra Life Authority.
Faucet connections, capacity of storage tanks / water tanks in the scheme, regular maintenance of the scheme
To supply water to the citizens keeping in view the time required for repair and other technical aspects.
Create a plan-wise schedule of water supply hours and their cycles.
be clearly stated. The local body water supply schedule is all relevant.
It should be promoted and disseminated with a view to making it known to the public and thereafter in this schedule.
The changes that have taken place should also be brought to the notice of the citizens in a timely manner.
20. Technical and Financial Coordination and Coordination Mechanism for Convergence:
The technicalities to be done for all the villages covered under all the water supply schemes in the district.
Financial measures as well as maintenance repair plans, planning, water for the management of the projects.
Budgeting, energy budgeting, various groundwater recharge measures, creating skilled manpower,
Capacity building, water conservation works, pollution of water bodies, other technical issues arising from time to time, etc.
The concerned Zilla Parishad will be the coordinating mechanism for guidance / assistance in this regard. the District
Their various departments under the council, Maharashtra Life Authority, Ground Water Surveillance and Development
System, State Pollution Control Corporation, Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation and others of the State Government.
Necessary among the various measures taken by the Department through its schemes and programmes from time to time.
The scheme should be implemented in every Gram Panchayat. The district concerned is responsible for ensuring that there is no duplication of the scheme.
It is a conference. The schemes that are getting duplicated should be brought to the notice of the department concerned in a timely manner.
Strengthening and convergence of resources:
Strengthening of water resources for projects and sustainable groundwater management.
The action will mainly be taken by the Ground Water Surveillance and Development System. Available water supply: 17 out of 49
# Page 18
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
The District Councils concerned are responsible for planning to reach out to the beneficiaries in an appropriate manner.
Raheel. Jalyukt Shivar, VB-Jiramji Yojana, Atal Bhujal Yojana, Catch the Rain, Drinking Water
Resource strengthening, to be implemented by the State Government as well as the Central Government from time to time.
Conservation of drinking water and water resources in every village with a single focus on schemes / programmes.
be strengthened. Year-on-year in line with measures to raise the groundwater level
The responsibility of preparing the action plan will lie with the respective District Councils and the implementing agencies.
Sustainability of resources where the water supply scheme is based on groundwater
Regarding rainwater harvesting by the respective District Water and Sanitation Missions for maintenance.
Measures should be taken. Maharashtra Ground Water with respect to Ground Water Based Water Supply Schemes
Provisions as per the (Development and Management) Act, 2009 as well as the prevailing laws of the Government and from time to time.
The directions to be issued shall be complied with by the departments concerned. The Act was enacted at the Gram Panchayat level.
Gram Panchayats and Zila Parishads to take action for strict implementation.
Be careful.
Considerations of changes in water availability, weather conditions, and other environmental factors
Follow the rules to limit the uncontrollable discharge of water from water sources.
It is essential that the water draining rate does not exceed 70 per cent of the available water.
The concerned Gram Panchayat shall ensure and regulate compliance with the limits of water availability.
Excessive use of surveillance methods should result in penal action.
Plantation, controlled grazing, soil conservation with a view to environmental conservation of the area around the water body.
The Zila Parishad, Panchayat Samiti and Gram Panchayat have taken control measures to prevent erosion.
Action should be taken.
22. Training of technical multi-skilled manpower under Nal Jal Mitra Programme:
rural areas under the Nal Jal Mitra programme by the government or as required from time to time.
Multi-skilling on RPL model to streamline maintenance and repair of water supply schemes
The implementation of a training program based or otherwise will come into play. Selection in each local body
The number of persons required is such as may be determined from time to time by the Government having done and having previous experience.
Training will be provided in the field. The manpower will be made available in every village and it will be provided with "NAL."
Jal Mitra "or by another name. Having completed such training and holding the prescribed certificate.
Trained Tap Jal Mitras have been engaged for maintenance and repair of rural tap water supply schemes.
18 out of 49 pages
# Page 19
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
It can be taken for work as per requirement. Rates of service of tap water mitras Related Local Self-Governments
will be determined by the organization from time to time.
Tap water supply scheme to the concerned trained skilled manpower during the training of Nal Jal Mitra
Training will be provided regarding the necessary tool kit and its use related to maintenance repair. or
The concerned government agencies ensure that the trainees are given proper training under the initiative.
It will be done in time. Collective information of trained manpower in the taluka and related group development.
The officers should assemble and use the manpower as required. Also, tap water friends
Related group development as to whether or how manpower is available in each village as per requirement
The officer should review and accordingly inform the State Water and Sanitation Mission through the Zilla Parishad.
Water conservation plan:
Highlighting the importance of water conservation as well as sustainable water use among school students in rural areas.
A government-sponsored "Jal Rakshak" scheme is being launched to provide. Under this scheme, all government and
Students in private schools are called "water guards" at their residential or village level to ensure access to government water supply and sanitation.
Cleanliness will be a top priority. School mainly on sustainable and environmentally friendly water use
To create awareness and a sense of responsibility among the students and through the medium of school students, their
The scheme has a dual purpose of spreading this spirit among the family and the community. the respective taluks.
The Education Officer and the Block Development Officer will conduct programmes for the promotion of the scheme. As well as, or
Students will be given due respect.
Capacity Building and Training:
Emergency for District / Taluka / Gram Panchayat Level Maintenance Correctional Committee Members
Time to time to handle the situation as well as for effective implementation of water supply schemes.
The training will be provided by the respective Zilla Parishad. To ensure smooth supply of water
Responsibility for capacity building of employees at district / taluka / village level.
There will be a district-level committee. Effective financial resources, especially to the Gram Panchayat level committees.
The critical need is to be able to manage and use. related to this.
Ensure financial transparency, accountability, and compliance with financial regulations by enforcement agencies
Training and guidance will be provided to do so. Also, the annual water supply budget, energy
19 out of 49 pages
# Page 20
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
Drinking Water Budget, Zero Leakage Policy and Finance Commission's (FC) Major Recommendations for Subsidies
Training for policy and other ancillary matters will be provided from time to time.
State Water and Sanitation Mission in coordination with the Summit Committee and Department of Water Supply and Sanitation
Annual Capacity Building Action Plan prepared for various infrastructure aspects of tap water supply schemes
It will be accepted. Capacity Building Action Plan, Monthly Review and Information
The State Water and Sanitation Mission will be responsible for the management. Under the Maharashtra Life Authority
Having trained manpower to improve long-term water supply management and service delivery.
Major requirement is related to multi-village / regional as well as separate water supply schemes.
The manpower will be periodically trained by the Maharashtra Life Authority.
25. Training in technical matters:
SCADA, Internet of Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence (AI), Financial
Audit matters, water supply schedule, water budget, water audit, energy accounting
All those working on water supply schemes for testing, resource management, etc.
Periodic training programmes for manpower are conducted under Zilla Parishad and Maharashtra Life Authority.
In line with the capacity building and training programme in technology and other specialised disciplines.
Maharashtra Environmental Engineering Training and Research Academy under the Department of Water Supply and Sanitation
Technical and other support from (METRA), Nashik will be provided.
Zero leakage policy:
They are supervised by a committee at every village level or the Maharashtra Life Authority.
If there is a leak in the existing plans, it should be repaired as soon as possible. as well as the pressure valve (pressure
Regular maintenance of valves), conduit connections, conduit connections, etc., should be repaired.
so as to help avoid wastage of water due to leakage at various places under the scheme.
Necessary measures should be taken in line with the implementation of the zero leakage policy. Water audit
The internal zero leakage policy should be implemented by the local body concerned. This is the water policy.
It is helpful in preventing leakages as well as conserving water resources and ensuring economic sustainability.
For this reason, the zero leakage policy is given special importance by the respective local bodies.
Measures should be implemented.
20 out of 49 pages
# Page 21
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
27. Water Audit:
Water audit is an important tool in sustainable and environmentally friendly water management. Water
The audit ensures efficient use of available water based on a thorough analysis of water use.
The emphasis should be on doing. These include intra-village water source, distribution, utilization, leakage, saving and recycling.
A water audit report is expected to be submitted as a balance sheet. or
Accordingly, all the implementing agencies - Gram Panchayats / GPs / MGPs and the concerned Committees
Water audit is done twice a year i.e. after monsoon and before summer.
Dissemination of information about available water and its efficient use through discussions in Gram Sabhas.
In water-deficient villages, water audit will be done on priority by the Gram Panchayat.
Based on this, necessary action measures will be taken by the Gram Panchayat so that there is no wastage of water.
will be implemented. Also, annual water audits for all the schemes that come under your purview.
Report submitted by all Zila Parishads and Maharashtra Life Authority Departments to State Water and Sanitation Mission
submitted to the government. Balance between the water from the source and the water reaching the consumer.
It will be mandatory to conduct a water audit. Also, the quarterly water
Preparation of Water Balance Sheet and details of Deposits and Expenditure by the Committee concerned.
It will be mandatory. Revenue calculated as per Water Balance Sheet
Necessary measures should be taken to reduce non-revenue water.
These include reducing water leakage in the canal, cracking down on illegal tap connections, water
Stopping the leakage of tanks, recycling of wastewater, proper management of human excreta through scientific processes.
There will be responsibilities for maintenance, proper use of electrical systems, repair of water meters, etc.
Water accounting and water supply from origin to household tap connections.
Bulk Metering and Consumers in a phased manner by the respective committees to avoid wastage.
Plan to install consumer metering.
Energy audit:
Note the large share of electricity bills in the total maintenance and repair cost of water supply schemes.
So, like water audit, energy audit of the schemes is required. Water
Saving energy in supply schemes is essential for increasing efficiency and cost control.
Operational cost due to use of smart / advanced technology and non-conventional energy etc.
can be significantly reduced. In line with ensuring long-term sustainability of water supply systems
The energy audit should be conducted annually in coordination with the committee and the concerned Gram Panchayat. Multigram /
21 out of 49 pages
# Page 22
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
The Regional Water Supply Schemes are decided by the respective Zila Parishad / Maharashtra Jeevan Authority.
An energy audit should be carried out within the time period. Annual action for maintenance repair of expenses in this regard.
The responsibility for making provisions in the plan will lie with the relevant enforcement agencies.
Electricity bill payments:
District Councils / Implementing Agencies to ensure timely payment of electricity bills
List the electric meters of the taluka-wise scheme and the Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company.
be made available to the concerned Taluk Officer of the Limited (MSEDCL). to be charged on the plan
Incoming monthly payment electronic meter wise data from the concerned power department officer.
Get it so that it is possible to pay the electricity payment on time.
30. Financial and ancillary matters under the policy:
30.1 Separate bank account for day-to-day maintenance repairs:
a) The day-to-day maintenance of the water supply scheme as required in accordance with the repair and operation
There should be a separate account to cover all expenses. These include Water Resources, Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation,
Payments for bulk water supply provided by etc.
(if any), the establishment cost on the scheme, the cost of electricity payments, the day-to-day architecture and mechanics of the scheme
Expenditure on repairs, chemicals required for water purification and desalination, etc. in this account.
Make a deposit.
b) Water collected from the citizens, user charges, to be paid on the intra-village distribution system.
Customer charges and deposits for new tap connections, penalties / delays
Amounts of the size, etc. will be credited to this account.
e) In a nationalized / commercial bank located in or near the village for the purpose of this fund.
A joint account should be opened in the name of the concerned Gram Sevak and Sarpanch. The state on the subject
To comply with the directions of the Government as the case may be or the instructions issued from time to time.
It will be mandatory.
e) It shall also be mandatory for each Gram Panchayat to maintain a separate record of this Maintenance and Repair Department.
Also, the Member Secretary of the local body concerned is responsible for keeping the accounts up to date.
They will remain.
e) Expenditure, Balance Fund of the previous year at the last Gram Sabha of each financial year,
It will be mandatory to submit an account of the proposed expenditure for the year. the local area concerned.
22 out of 49 pages
# Page 23
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
The Member Secretary of the autonomous body will be responsible. The accounts are also maintained annually in the month of May / June.
be submitted to the senior authorities within a month.
f) The fund should be regularly audited and reported to the relevant authorities.
The responsibility of submission to the authorities shall lie with the Gram Sevak / Village Extension Officer concerned.
In this regard, the concerned group development officer should take care of this from time to time.
30.2 Corpus Fund for maintenance repairs of water supply schemes:
a) Regular day-to-day maintenance of water supply schemes for repair and effective management.
It has been observed from time to time that the local bodies are not getting the required amount of funds.
It has come. For example, maintenance and repair of every water supply scheme in rural areas of the state.
Availability of financial resources required for effective operation and management.
A "Consolidated Fund" (Water Supply Corpus Fund) will be set up to ensure this.
b) the Sarpanch concerned in the village or the nationalized bank near the village for the purpose of this fund; and
A joint account should be opened in the name of the Gram Sevak. The status quo with the state government in this regard
The concerned shall be bound to comply with the directions and directions issued from time to time.
e) Incentive Grants, Finance received from the Central or State Government in the said Consolidated Fund.
Funds received from the Commission, public contribution, 10 per cent of the maintenance and repair cost of the scheme.
Rural tap water supply through sewerage, other government subsidies, Zila Parishads
20 per cent of the fixed annual income earmarked for the schemes, corporate social
Financial assistance under Corporate Social Responsibility, and other donations, etc.
will be included.
e) Use of the Consolidated Fund from the funds available in the account with the approval of the competent authority.
Preferably in the future; long-term use of outdated pipelines, electric pumps
Reconstruction / repair of components, renovation of damaged infrastructure, distribution
For system expansion, digital monitoring, IoT systems, etc.
a) For the purpose of daily maintenance, repair and recovery of water table on the scheme from the said Consolidated Fund.
Incentive grants may be given to the appointed body / institution. However, this amount is only a deposit.
Interest can only be paid with the approval of the competent authority.
f) The budget shall provide for the Consolidated Fund of Local Self-Governments every year, and
The funds will be used as capital expenditure.
23 out of 49 pages
# Page 24
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
r) Water Supply Consolidated Fund as it will receive funds from various sources.
A separate register should also be maintained by the local body.
C2) 11-11 The effectiveness of the available funds is to keep the books of accounts related to the Supplies Consolidated Fund up-to-date.
Ensure management and align with sustainable water supply goals.
There is a very important process for insertion. Keeping the accounts related to the Consolidated Fund up to date.
The responsibility will be of the Member Secretary of the concerned local body.
a) The amount of funds received and expenditure incurred in the last Gram Sabha of each financial year for the previous year.
It will be mandatory to submit the accounts and the budget for the next year. Related group development
The officer will be responsible. Also the previous year's budget and accounts for the month of May / June every year.
During the month, the Member Secretary of the concerned Local Self-Government Organization shall communicate the same to the concerned senior authorities.
be submitted.
The SJ NISTaS Zilla Parishad has largely notified hills for Gram Panchayats in its district.
Corporates to meet the cost of maintenance repair for schemes in area, forest area, tribal area
Financial assistance under Corporate Social Responsibility, public participation,
Try to get internal financial help, such as donations, corporate help, etc.
a) The competent authority for the Consolidated Fund shall be the Taluk Level Committee.
a) The funds from the Consolidated Fund should not be used for day-to-day maintenance repairs. The origin of this fund
The amount (principal) shall be used only in case of emergency with the approval of the competent authority. The original
The interest on the amount or the income received is used only for the predetermined purpose of maintenance repair.
Divide the amount used after this use into four equal parts over a period of four years.
Repayment of this amount will be mandatory to be deposited in the Consolidated Fund. This period is enabled
It can be extended for a period of one year with the approval of the authority.
The work for which the funds are spent from the Consolidated Fund Account before the proposal is submitted.
Detailed information about what needs to be done and prescribed after utilization of funds
Repayment of the above amount to the Consolidated Fund within a period of time.
The proposal with the details should be placed before the Gram Sabha. Only after the approval of the Gram Sabha.
The proposal should be submitted to the Taluk Level Committee for approval.
The Taluk Level Committee shall take a decision within eight days and make a proposal.
If you refuse, the reasons for it should be mentioned.
24 out of 49 pages
# Page 25
Government Decision No.: Grapadho 2025 / No. 185 / Papu-07 The responsibility of ensuring that the sanctioned funds are spent only for specified purposes is concerned.
The Member Secretary of the local body shall be the concerned Group Development Officer.
This should be checked periodically.
The income and expenditure of the Consolidated Fund is audited by the local body concerned.
This should be done and a report submitted to the Taluk Level Committee every year.
The Depreciation Fund:
Depreciation fund of 10% of the day-to-day maintenance repair cost of each scheme every year.
It will be kept as a depreciation fund. Each local self-government body will collect this depreciation fund.
be deposited into the fund.
30.4 Annual Plan of Action for Maintenance Repair:
Local Self Government Committees / Maharashtra Life Authority for each financial year.
Plan-wise Maintenance Repair Annual Action Plan (O & M) during the month of February-March every year
Annual Action Plan) to be prepared and the annual action plan for this amendment to be prepared by the competent authority.
Get approval. Technical, financial, and manpower planning should be done accordingly. in that financial year.
Capital works to be undertaken, specific repairs, regular expenses (installation, unclean / clean water payments, electricity,
chemicals, maintenance of daily architectural and mechanical components, water quality inspection), natural disasters, and others.
Provision should be made for incidental expenditure, training, awareness generation (IEC) arising out of the causes.
The Village Water and Sanitation Committee at the village level is responsible for the financial management of the water supply scheme.
This includes preparing an annual budget, keeping accurate records of income and expenses, and funding.
To ensure that the use is made for the intended purpose, maintenance repairs for each financial year.
This will include preparing a plan and making financial planning.
30.7 Evaluation of Schemes for Grant Distribution:
Implementation of Maintenance Repair Committees for efficient maintenance of the scheme /
The following criteria will need to be met by the agencies and the government while disbursing the subsidy:
Rural water supply schemes will be assessed at the level considering the following:
a) Percentage of recovery of maintenance repair costs
b) Percentage of catchment area
25 out of 49 pages
# Page 26
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
e) The percentage of non-revenue water (not exceeding 15 per cent). )
e) Continuity in time and duration of release of water
a) Measures to make the outbreak sustainable
f) Regular payment of electricity bill payments.
r) According to the Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organization (CPHEEO) manual
Regular maintenance of mechanical accessories and keeping the register up to date.
C2) Keeping all reports up to date.
a) Regular water supply to schools, anganwadis and ashramshalas.
\) Implement VIO conservation, eco-friendly measures.
a) Scientific disposal of human excreta in the toilet.
i) Maintaining the ODF status of villages, as well as solid waste management, liquid waste management, and
Achieving ODF + status through visible cleaning, etc.
(a) Innovative and notable works on water quality and resource conservation.
Central Command Centre and Information Management:
Systematic information management at various levels for sustainable operation of water supply schemes.
There has to be a system. Water supply run by rural local bodies
There will be centralized control and information management of the schemes. with the approval of the State Government.
Central Command Centre at State Water and Sanitation Mission level and
Establishment of District Central Command Centre at the district level.
Also, for maintenance repair of schemes run by Maharashtra Jeevan Authority.
Central Water Management Company incorporated under the Authority with the approval of the State Government.
The power to do so shall remain with the Maharashtra Life Authority. The following are covered under this system:
will be implemented.
Taluk and district level committee control system, plan-wise data base,
Standard reports, etc. for the ancillary aspects of water supply schemes.
A comprehensive software system will be developed from time to time as per the requirement.
A software system is a centralized data base system.
There will be a system in which information will be sent through the KML file of each plan. This information
The responsibility of uploading on the system rests with the respective Zila Parishad and Maharashtra Jeevan Authority.
26 out of 49 pages
# Page 27
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
These KML files are also relevant for attachment on the Gati Shakti portal of the Central Government.
Coordination with the system will be required. To be implemented by Maharashtra Life Authority.
DPMS and IoT systems for real-time control of schemes as well as district
ZP-PMS is a system for real-time control of tap water supply schemes under the council.
Tap water supply has been developed and the information received through this system is used.
The maintenance of the plans should be done in the proposed software for repair. Local self-government
The Institute / Maharashtra Jeevan Authority will have the freedom to create their software from time to time.
However, the information / data contained in the said software is from the Central Government IMIS and the State Government.
The software will require a real-time basis data transfer. Also, to save energy.
Primarily smart technology solutions such as prepaid smart meters, SCADA systems, GIS, IoT, Automated
Use of technology such as meter reading and smart water meter etc. is preferred as per the availability of funds.
should be given.
Regional in the initial phase in line with the implementation of IoT technology and software systems
Implementation of IoT projects is being approved for the schemes. as well as IoT projects.
For the implementation of the new project in addition to the ongoing works, under the aforesaid headings, visit the 2026-27
During the financial year, Rs. An allocation of ₹500 crore is being approved through Supplementary Demands.
32. Water resources monitoring and mapping of groundwater resources:
Public water management is important in keeping with the sustainability of water supply facilities.
Water resources monitoring to accurately assess the availability and quality of water resources.
It is very important to do. Surface and Sub-Surface in Water Resources Surveying
Water sources are assessed. Regular water resource monitoring and information management
The responsibility lies with the Ground Water Surveillance and Development System. Ground Water under Water Resources Surveillance
The following major factors have been studied by the Surveillance and Development System:
Periodic reports should be submitted:
a) Availability of water: Taking into account seasonal and annual changes.
b) Water Quality: Examination of physical, chemical, and biological properties.
e) Utilization of water resources: for drinking, agriculture, industrial use.
e) Pollution Control: Monitoring of industrial waste, wastewater and other pollutants.
e) Sedimentation: Impacts on water storage capacity and flow.
f) Effects of climate change: Impacts on water resources due to rainfall and temperature change.
27 out of 49 pages
# Page 28
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
Groundwater resources with a view to ensuring long-term availability and security of ground water.
Evaluate availability, quality, and rechargeability. Mapping of Ground Water Resources
Aquifer mapping should also be dealt with by the Ground Water Surveillance and Development System.
Information display:
Drinking water supply in the village along with measures for water quality monitoring and control.
Water quality of water sources and water supplied through water supply schemes
The relevant criteria need to be examined. Citizens should be aware of the results of this test.
It's important. Water sampling done by Faldi test kits or in laboratories is followed accordingly.
Information on test results Schools, Anganwadi Centres and Gram Panchayat Office, Community Water
Periodic display at any one of such public places near the resources of the concerned rural local
The institution of self-government will be obligatory.
34. Tap water service applications:
Improving efficiency in water strip recovery, maintenance repair by field enforcement agencies.
Central Government for taking records, data collection, etc. of the matters required under the component.
"Tap water service applications" developed or to be developed from time to time.
The system should be used on priority. Also, on the same lines, modern digital payment systems such as
Technology-based tools will also be developed by the government from time to time.
35. Structure, objectives and procedures of the Maintenance Corrections Committee:
The composition, duties, objectives and procedures of the Maintenance and Repair Committee shall be as follows:
35.1 Structure of the Maintenance and Repair Committee:
Operation, maintenance and repair of rural tap water supply schemes on completion.
To provide adequate and quality water supply to the citizens in a regular and efficient manner.
For regional and separate water supply schemes at different levels, as required, the following:
Maintenance Repair Committees will be in place. It was earlier constituted under the Jal Jeevan Mission.
The Committees are the Executive Committee, District Water and Sanitation Mission, Village Water and Sanitation Committee.
Maintenance will continue to operate with the new repair workspace. Also, life in Maharashtra with these
28 out of 49 pages
# Page 29
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
Divisional Level Committee for Authority Schemes and Taluk for Zilla Parishad Schemes
The level committee is being reconstituted.
The respective field officers of other departments are required to assist all the said committees.
The Chairman of the Committee shall have the power to call for meetings for the effective implementation of this Policy.
will remain.
State Level Committee / Summit Committee of State Water and Sanitation Missions:
The State Water and Sanitation Programme has been constituted as per the guidelines of the Jal Jeevan Mission Programme.
The Summit Committee of the Sanitation Mission is the state body for the implementation of the policy and other ancillary matters.
There will be a level committee. The duties of the Committee shall be as follows:
The duties:
1) To regulate the operation, maintenance and repair of rural water supply schemes.
Accordingly, the policy may be modified as per the instructions of the Central Government or as the situation may change.
Approval of such changes / corrections / corrections, if required, as per the relevant guidelines.
issuing and implementing it.
(ii) Administrative, technical and financial matters relating to operation, maintenance and repair of water supply schemes.
To guide the enforcement agencies in accordance with the matters.
(iii) To prepare and approve the Annual Plan of Action for Maintenance and Repair at the State level; and
making budgetary provisions.
4) Preparation and approval of watershed development plan / water conservation plan at the state level.
Guidance on preparation of district-wise watershed development plan / water conservation plan.
to do and to implement it.
5) Management of human excreta in public and private toilets in rural areas.
Deciding on a policy.
6) To coordinate the affairs of various departments of the government.
7) Setting up a water recycling policy.
8) For water audit and power audit of rural water supply schemes.
Issue of guidelines.
9) Identifying innovative technologies for maintenance repair as well as resource replenishment / renovation.
To inform the enforcement agencies about it and encourage its use.
10) To decide and guide other policy matters.
29 out of 49 pages
# Page 30
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
35.3 Maharashtra Life Authority Department Level Committee:
The committee is being reconstituted and the composition of the committee will be as follows.
Chief Engineer * Chairman
Member of the Superintending Engineer
Deputy Director, BSVM Member
the concerned Executive Engineer (Zilla Parishad) Member
Regional Officer, Member, Maharashtra Pollution Control Board (MPCB)
Sub-District Health Officer Member
Member Secretary to the concerned Executive Engineer (M.G.P.)
The committee discussed the following about the water supply schemes being implemented by the Maharashtra Jeevan Authority:
perform the duties.
The duties:
1) To regulate the day-to-day operation, maintenance and repair of tap water supply schemes.
2) Technical support to the relevant agencies for day-to-day operation, maintenance and repair of water supply schemes;
Supply of financial and manpower resources.
3) Determining the water band required for the sustainable operation of water supply schemes; and
to recover it from all the shareholders.
4) Annual maintenance repair plan and annual budget for water supply schemes.
to create.
5) Controlling the corpus fund as well as the maintenance and repair fund and its expenditure.
to be approved.
6) Financial audit of scheme-wise utilization of funds and submit report to the Government.
to do.
7) Water conservation, afforestation, resource replenishment in line with sustainability of water supply schemes.
Implementation of water budget, water audit, pollution control, etc.
8) Water conservation, afforestation, resource replenishment in line with sustainability of water supply schemes.
Implementation of resource conservation, water budgeting, water audit, pollution control, etc.
9) Formulating a toilet wastewater management policy.
10) To submit reports as directed by the Government from time to time.
30 out of 49 pages
# Page 31
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
11) Sewage from toilets in the department as per the policy approved by the State Level Committee.
management and implementation. Drainage of silt from this structure from time to time and its proper
to manage.
12) Take measures to ensure water supply sources are safe.
13) Implementation of Wastewater Management and Water Recycling Policy.
14) To guide and assist the local bodies from time to time with respect to technical matters.
15) Implementing innovative technologies for maintenance repair as well as resource replenishment / renovation; and
To guide the local self-government institutions.
16) Implementing innovative technologies and formulating an energy audit policy in line with energy savings.
To guide the local self-government institutions in the submission of taxes to the State Committee.
17) Periodic review of the availability of skilled manpower in the department through NAL JAL MITRA / Trained,
To keep track of them and supply skilled manpower to the concerned system as required.
18) To coordinate with other Government offices in the Department and to field officers / agencies.
guidance from time to time.
19) Distribution and collection of water band payments, operation and maintenance of tap water supply scheme for repair.
To make available the draft agreement to all levels of the Department for the appointment of the mechanism and
To approve such an agreement from the Maharashtra Life Authority.
20) Government tap water supply schemes, resource conservation, resource recharge, water conservation, water pollution
Submission of periodic reports to the Government as an expert mechanism in respect of such matters, etc.
21) To the Government for water supply management, water resource recharge, water resource conservation and other matters.
Periodic guidance to local bodies for ancillary matters such as providing technical assistance, etc.
to do.
22) Report to the Government from time to time after studying the matters in question or newly arising matters and
submission of the measures.
35.4 District Level Committee / District Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM):
District Water and Sanitation constituted as per the guidelines of Jal Jeevan Mission Programme.
The Sanitation Mission (DWSM) is the district for implementation of the policy and other ancillary matters.
There will be a level committee. In addition to the existing members of the District Water and Sanitation Mission
The following officers will also be members of the Committee:
Deputy Engineer (Mechanical / Maintenance Repair), Zilla Parishad / PWD
31 out of 49 pages
# Page 32
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
2. Sub-Regional Officer, Maharashtra Pollution Control Corporation
The Chairman shall have the power to take over the other members of the Committee as may be necessary in accordance with the local situation.
It will be.
The Committee shall perform the following duties with respect to the water supply schemes being implemented in the district:
The duties:
1) Day-to-day operation, maintenance and maintenance of tap water supply schemes in the district.
Controlling for repairs and other related matters.
2) Technical support to the relevant agencies for day-to-day operation, maintenance and repair of water supply schemes;
Supply of financial and manpower resources.
3) Determining the water band required for the sustainable operation of water supply schemes; and
To regulate its recovery by all stakeholders.
4) Annual Drinking Water and Maintenance Repair Plan and Annual in accordance with water supply schemes.
Preparation of the budget and presentation at the Annual General Meeting.
5) Regulating the corpus fund as well as the maintenance repair fund.
6) Financial audit of scheme-wise fund utilization and reporting at the state level.
Submission to the Committee.
7) Water band payment distribution, recovery, operation and maintenance of tap water supply scheme for repair.
To make available to all the subordinate agencies the draft agreement for appointing the mechanism and
ratification of such agreement by the Gram Panchayats.
8) District-wise watershed development plan, preparation of comprehensive water conservation plan, and
To approve and control the implementation of the plan.
9) Identify water conservation practices in accordance with the geographical and geological conditions of the district.
Encouraging use.
10) Formulate and implement a wastewater management and water recycling policy.
11) To provide guidance and assistance to the Gram Panchayat from time to time with respect to technical and financial matters.
12) Implementing innovative technologies in line with maintenance repair, resource replenishment / renovation.
13) Implementing innovative technologies and regular energy audits in line with energy savings.
to do.
14) Each of the schemes implemented by the various government departments in the district is coordinated.
Preparation and implementation of village-wise action plan.
32 out of 49 pages
# Page 33
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
15) Water of each water supply scheme is checked for its quality.
Informing the stakeholders of the specifications / reports, as well as preparing a village-wise schedule for water sampling.
to implement it.
16) Sources consistent with sources found to be contaminated or not up to the prescribed standards
Taking immediate remedial measures such as privatisation, source closure, etc.
17) Periodic review of availability of Nal Jal Mitra / trained skilled manpower, collation of the same.
Keeping informed and providing skilled manpower to Gram Panchayats as required.
18) Control of groundwater depletion in the district, in all the catchment areas of the district.
Effective implementation of water conservation and other allied measures in areas of over-exploitation.
19) Formulate a policy for scientific management of human waste and sewage in rural areas.
to implement it.
20) Plan of action for agricultural pollution near drinking water sources.
Prepare and strictly implement them.
21) To coordinate the centrality of government schemes. the water supply sources of each village and
Implement at least one water conservation / recharge scheme on unused sources.
22) Periodic training and capacity building for all stakeholders covered under the maintenance overhaul of the scheme.
Organizing the construction program.
23) Taluk / Gram Panchayat level committee in coordination with various departments of the government.
support and guidance.
24) To comply with the directions issued by the Government from time to time.
25) From time to time, the subject matter or newly arising matters are studied and referred to the Government.
Submitting a report to the government with measures.
26) Prevention of contaminants near water sources.
27) To take measures to prevent water pollution of lakes / dams, rivers.
35.5 Taluk Level Committee: The Committee is being reconstituted and constituted.
It will be as follows.
Group Development Officer - Chairman
Deputy Engineer (Rural Water Supply) - Member
Branch Engineer (Mechanical / Maintenance Repair) G.S.V.M. - Member
33 out of 49 pages
# Page 34
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
Extension Officer - Member
Minimum Geologist - Member
Health Officer - Member
Branch Engineer (Architecture, PU) - Member Secretary
Committee on Water Supply Schemes implemented by Zilla Parishad in Taluk
The following duties must be performed:
The duties:
1) To supervise and guide the Maintenance and Correctional Committee at the Gram Panchayat level.
2) Taluk level committees to act as a link between Zilla Parishads and Gram Panchayats.
(iii) Technical support to the concerned agencies for day-to-day operation, maintenance and repair of water supply schemes;
Supply of financial and manpower resources.
4) Guidance to Gram Panchayats on water banding and recovery of water supply schemes.
To guide the village panchayat in determining the amount of deposit for household tap connections.
Annual maintenance repair plan and annual budget for water supply schemes.
To guide and approve the preparation of the village panchayat.
6) Regulating the corpus fund as well as the maintenance repair fund.
7) Allowing the villagers to use the corpus fund.
8) To fix and control the return of funds spent to the concerned Gram Panchayat.
to keep.
9) For distribution, recovery, operation and maintenance repair of tap water supply scheme.
To ratify the agreement made by the Gram Panchayat to appoint the mechanism.
10) Watershed development of each Gram Panchayat with the help of Ground Water Surveillance Development System.
Implementation of necessary measures in line with the Plan / Water Conservation Plan.
11) Water conservation, afforestation, resource recharge in line with sustainability of water supply schemes.
Implementation of water budget, water audit, pollution control, etc.
12) Checking of sources and other preventive measures under water quality monitoring and sanitation programmes.
Keeping a check on the regularity of the measures being taken.
13) Water of each water supply scheme is checked for its quality.
Village-wise schedule of water sampling along with intimation of specifications / reports to the concerned.
Creating and implementing it.
34 out of 49 pages
# Page 35
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
14) Sources consistent with sources found to be contaminated or not up to the prescribed standards.
Urgently take measures such as privatization, source closure, etc.
15) Display of water quality test results / specifications in public places in every Gram Panchayat.
Be aware of what is being done.
16) Necessary measures in line with implementation of Wastewater Management and Water Recycling Policy.
to do.
17) Periodic review of availability of Nal Jal Mitra / trained skilled manpower, collation of the same.
Keeping informed and requesting the Zilla Parishad as required.
18) Periodic training and capacity building for all stakeholders covered under the maintenance overhaul of the scheme.
Organizing the construction program.
19) To assist the Gram Panchayats in the preparation of water supply schedules.
Be aware of the implementation.
20) To comply with the directions issued by the Government and the District Level Committee from time to time.
21) Scientific management of human waste and wastewater in rural areas.
implementation of the policy.
22) From time to time, the subject matter or newly arising matters are studied and referred to the Government.
Submitting a report to the government with measures.
35.6 Gram Panchayat Level Committee / Village Water and Sanitation Committee (VWSC):
Village Water and Sanitation as per the guidelines of Jal Jeevan Mission Programme.
The Sanitation Committee (VWSC) is the Gram Panchayat for the implementation of the policy and other ancillary matters.
There will be a level committee. (At least 50% of the committee constituted as above are women and backward classes.)
Representatives should be included. Also, every Wadi / Basti falling under the Gram Panchayat can have
Make sure you get the right representation. )
The Committee shall perform the following duties in respect of water supply schemes implemented by the Gram Panchayat:
The duties:
1) Daily operation, maintenance of tap water supply schemes implemented by the Gram Panchayat.
and control related to repairs.
2) Technical support to the relevant agencies for day-to-day operation, maintenance and repair of water supply schemes;
Supply of financial and manpower resources.
35 out of 49 pages
# Page 36
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
3) Determining the water band required for the sustainable operation of water supply schemes; and
to recover it from all the shareholders. Also, determine the amount of deposit for household tap connections.
and to assess it.
4) Annual maintenance repair plan and annual budget for water supply schemes.
Preparation and getting it approved by the Gram Sabha.
5) Consolidated fund for day-to-day operation, maintenance and repair of water supply schemes (corpus fund).
and regular use of maintenance repair funds and regular updating of separate accounts thereon.
6) Audit of fund utilization and report to Gram Sabha, Competent Authority and Taluk.
Submission to the Level Committee.
7) Water band payment distribution, recovery, operation and maintenance of tap water supply scheme for repair.
To enter into an agreement with the approval of the competent authority for appointment of the mechanism and to enter into such agreement with the Gram Sabha.
Acceptance.
8) Watershed Development Plan / Water Conservation Plan with the help of Ground Water Surveillance Development System
Implementing the necessary measures in line with the plan.
9) Water conservation, afforestation, resource replenishment in line with sustainability of water supply schemes.
Implementation of water budget, energy budget, water audit, pollution control, etc.
10) Providing new tap connections as per the demand of the villagers.
11) Groundwater Surveillance Development System under Water Quality Surveillance and Sanitation Programme.
Regular check-ups of all sources and other preventive measures.
12) Water samples of all sources as per the prescribed procedure as per the directions of the Government for water sample testing.
Collecting, sending such samples to the respective laboratories and receiving reports thereof.
13) Display of all water quality test results / specifications in public places.
14) Source sanitization, source closure, etc. in line with sources found to be contaminated.
take immediate action. Also, water samples from such sources should be tested.
15) Periodic water sample testing by Feldy Test Kits.
16) Necessary measures in line with implementation of Wastewater Management and Water Recycling Policy.
to do.
17) Periodic review of the availability of trained skilled manpower / tap water mitras; and
To make a demand to the Taluk Level Committee as required.
36 out of 49 pages
# Page 37
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
18) Periodic training and capacity building for all stakeholders covered under the maintenance overhaul of the scheme.
Attending a construction event. Also, awareness and training for the villagers as per requirement.
organizing the event.
19) Preparation of water supply schedule, this schedule should be communicated to all the villagers.
Arranging for reach through mobile messaging, etc., and strictly following this schedule.
to implement.
20) To take all necessary measures to ensure smooth and uninterrupted supply of water.
21) To comply with the directions issued by the Taluk Level and District Level Committee from time to time.
22) To comply with the directions issued by the Government from time to time.
23) Scientific management of toilet wastewater in Gram Panchayats and desilting pits and
Periodic removal of silt from other structures as well as scientific management.
24) To ensure that the water supply sources are not polluted.
25) To guide the Gram Panchayat on water and energy audit.
26) To work at the ancillary village level in line with the drinking water policy.
Water quality control and monitoring:
Keeping in mind the objective of providing clean and pure potable water under Jal Jeevan Mission
Regular water quality as per norms set by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS).
Monitoring and periodically ensuring that the piped water supply is potable and safe for use.
It will be necessary to make sure. In line with the theme of Water Quality under Jal Jeevan Mission
Water quality monitoring and monitoring programmes are being implemented in rural areas of the state.
The following are expected to be implemented.
Water Quality Monitoring (WQM)
The following should be implemented:
a) Public drinking water sources and household tap water samples
Field testing and laboratory in specified time periods as directed from time to time.
to perform laboratory testing,
(b) the relevant sectoral mechanisms, such as the Ground Water Surveillance and Development System and the District Council.
Check records on the website and information on affected sources to the respective Gram Panchayats immediately.
to be informed,
37 out of 49 pages
# Page 38
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
e) Ground Water Surveillance and Development System to provide affordable water testing facilities to the rural population.
Providing and making available to the public information on water quality,
e) Strengthening of Water Quality Testing Laboratories and Laboratories NABL
the authorization,
e) Evaluate and rank laboratories,
f) In line with making Gram Panchayats self-sufficient for water quality checking in villages.
To train women and create awareness about water quality.
36.2 Water Quality Surveillance
The following should be implemented:
a) Public in association with villagers and trained women in Gram Panchayats over a specified period of time.
Field Test Kits / Multiparameter Kits of drinking water sources.
to be examined with the help of,
b) Water samples found infected in field test kits
Further testing in the laboratory,
e) Conduct sanitation inspections at the Gram Panchayat level after at least a half-year and the affected
Suggestions made by the health department to control the spread of water-borne diseases in the villages.
the planning of the measures,
e) Water to rural people through Panchayat Samiti and Gram Panchayat by Zila Parishad.
Raise awareness about quality and the ill-effects of drinking contaminated water on health.
to do it,
a) Responsibility for monitoring and monitoring the water quality of all sources of drinking water.
To urge the Gram Panchayats to take.
36.3 Water Quality Responsibilities:
Information issued by the Government from time to time under the Water Quality Monitoring and Control Programme.
All potable water consumed in villages / wadis / hamlets as per schedule
To conduct water sampling of sources and water supply scheme tap water supply.
The responsibility will be of the respective Gram Panchayat and Ground Water Surveillance and Development System. Biologicals of water and
Chemical inspection reports are regularly implemented by the Ground Water Surveillance and Development System.
To be made available to the system (Gram Panchayat / Zilla Parishad / Maharashtra Life Authority) within 3 days.
38 out of 49 pages
# Page 39
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
It will be necessary. Preventive measures on sources found contaminated in water sample testing
Also, alternate clean water supply in the affected areas and ban on long-term sources of contamination.
The respective Zilla Parishads will be responsible. After receipt of records / reports of water sample testing
Groundwater Surveillance and Development responsible for immediate updates to IMIS, WQMIS and other systems
There will be a system. Or as directed by the Government from time to time, action will be taken by the concerned.
should do.
36.4 Use of latest technology for water quality matters:
MIS based and disseminated by the government for information display and dissemination of all these reports.
In developing computer algorithms for transmitting information in real time.
The responsibility of filling in the required and non-essential information in this order rests with the relevant system / locality.
It will be a self-governing body. Computer software-based MIS for water quality issues
Developing systems, Field Test Kits / Multiparameter Kits, etc.
Department of Water Supply and Sanitation for maintenance, laboratory up-gradation, etc.
Funds will be made available through budgetary provision.
River Conservation and Prevention of River Pollution:
The impact of rivers in the local area and the environment in the area on its water resources
River conservation becomes important from the point of view of resource management of the schemes as it happens.
The Zilla Parishad in its watershed development plan as well as water conservation plan has included river conservation and
Necessary measures should be incorporated in line with river pollution control so that the medium
The sources of water supply schemes will remain clean and hygienic for a long period of time. the district concerned.
Conferences coordinate with all government departments in their respective areas and work out an action plan accordingly.
Prepare and follow up with the relevant department on implementation. Recognize the importance of this work
The District Collector concerned is the Chairman of the District Water and Sanitation Mission.
Keep control of the above-mentioned matters in the workplace.
Prevention of Agricultural Pollution:
Excessive use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides in agriculture and allied activities.
Pollutants such as animal droppings adversely affect nearby drinking water sources. It's like that
Page 39 out of 49
# Page 40
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
Groundwater and ground water drinking water with effluents flowing into or leaking into the ground.
They contaminate water sources by mixing with them. Particularly in drinking water, such as nitrates.
It has been observed from time to time that the mixing has resulted in health problems for the citizens who use the water.
Hence, the Zila Parishad coordinated with the Agriculture Department and the Pollution Control Corporation in this regard.
An action plan should be prepared for this. Farmers with the help of the Department of Agriculture
There should be awareness. Especially those near agricultural land and in regular use.
More care is taken with regard to the resources and periodic biological and chemical sampling of the water samples there.
An investigation should be done. On this subject, the Collector appointed the Chairman of the District Water and Sanitation Mission.
In this regard, coordination should be maintained among all the concerned agencies and necessary directions should be given.
39. Maintenance of individual toilets and community toilets in rural areas:
individual toilets and community toilets in rural areas with abrasions or other
Human excrement is processed in a scientific manner by creating a classical structure. as well as
Gaps accumulated in the structure are calculated according to its durability and capacity.
If the extraction is not done in time, the fluid exits the structure. Over time
flows into a drain in a nearby village or others that have come out of the area during the rainy season.
They are washed away in streams with bamboos. This leads to contamination of the water bodies. Individual in rural areas
and villagers for periodic inspection of community toilet exploitation pits and appropriate action thereon.
It should be done by an autonomous body. The sewage and domestication of the villages surrounding the dam / reservoir
Local self-government bodies and control of dams / reservoirs so that sewage does not go into the reservoir.
The authorities should take necessary measures in coordination. the Chief Executive of the concerned
The officers of the Zilla Parishad as well as the District Collector shall prepare an action plan / measures in this regard.
Make sure to follow up periodically.
40. Awareness of basic amenities of sanitation and water supply in rural areas:
A demand-based policy exists for water supply schemes. The Demands and Needs of the Villages
Accordingly, water supply schemes are sanctioned by the government from time to time. However, over time
It has been observed that the attitude of the citizens towards it is changing. In the village
Since the resources are created for the village, it is a feeling that all citizens should take care of it.
The various water supply works undertaken by the government to create among them.
Various to encourage them through the Zilla Parishad to maintain cleanliness and hygiene in the area.
Plan or announce financial incentives from time to time. Various water supply schemes 40 out of 49 pages
# Page 41
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
They are implemented by the government / local bodies. While the work was in progress
It is very important to monitor the quality. Accordingly, from time to time, the enforcement agencies
An inspection is being done. Strict inspection is required during such inspection visits. However,
The citizens of the village for which the scheme is in progress should be aware of the quality of the work.
It's necessary. So that the participation of the citizens can be seen in it. In the workplace
Details, name and contact number of the contractor, details of funds and expenses, duration of work, etc.
The display of a billboard will make the citizens aware of it and the quality of work done.
The contractor will be constrained to maintain it.
Recycling of water:
Water is a vital resource. To ensure its proper and balanced use.
It is very important to take various measures. Reuse of treated water
Water) is an important and sustainable water management solution. water industry, agriculture, and
Effectively used for domestic use, etc., will reduce the stress on available water resources.
Recycled water can save water, reduce water pollution, conserve water resources, water
Water sustainability for future generations through more efficient and environmentally friendly use of resources.
will be available. For this purpose, the water is treated and used for other purposes (e.g. the agriculture,
The local self-government should focus on taking necessary measures regarding doing industry, etc.). 1000
Sewage treatment systems should be set up in local bodies with a large population and
These treated wastewater recycling contracts charge priority to agriculture, factories, etc.
It will be paid for or free of charge. In the form of wastewater recycling to increase the income of the Gram Panchayat.
The Gram Panchayat will have the power to make financial planning. The government's approach to water recycling
The procedure will be issued.
42. Utilization of Renewable / Renewable Energy:
Depending on the availability of funds for existing as well as newly approved schemes.
Steps should be taken to use renewable energy in a phased manner. In addition, the plans
Places where it is possible, taking into account geographical conditions and availability of energy sources, etc.
Use of renewable / renewable energy for power supply to various components of the scheme at site.
The emphasis should be on doing. Under the Jal Jeevan Mission programme, all households in rural areas of the state will be covered.
With the aim of providing sustainable water supply through functional tap connections, a large number of
Rural tap water supply schemes have been sanctioned and after implementation of these schemes, 41 out of 49 have been sanctioned.
# Page 42
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
To run the scheme with full efficiency after it is transferred to the respective local bodies.
The responsibility lies with the respective local bodies. In the maintenance and repair cost of water supply schemes
Electricity payments account for approximately 35 to 40 percent. At present, for rural water supply schemes
The power required is mainly sourced from the conventional electricity grid. in the power supply
Water supply services due to breakdowns, rising power tariff, and inadequate power facilities in remote areas
It is difficult to give consistently. Also, in view of the rising cost of electricity bills, the local bodies have
Non-payment of regular power bills of the scheme results in the power supply being cut off and the scheme
Capital expenditures incurred by the government are likely to go waste as they close over time. For the reason,
Reducing dependence on conventional power, as well as the burden of electricity payments on local self-governments.
To create a system to reduce and run the scheme more efficiently and for a longer period of time; and
Aim to move towards the use of a cleaner, renewable and environmentally friendly energy source.
Separate as well as regional water supply schemes in rural areas of the state to be based on solar energy.
is proposed. Accordingly, solar energy will be provided to rural water supply schemes in the state.
To set up solar power projects for all the schemes in a phased manner as per the availability of funds accordingly.
Approval has been given for formulation of comprehensive policy in coordination with Department of Power.
Necessary action will be taken by the Water Supply and Sanitation Department.
The project is estimated to cost Rs. 2310 crore is required.
For the first phase of implementation, the financial year 2026-27 under the aforesaid accounting
During the year, Rs. 1000 crores is being approved through Supplementary Demands.
43. One Time Settlement Scheme for pending power bills:
Power bills of rural water supply schemes are high due to insufficient water table recovery.
Exhaustion in quantity and its adverse effect on the day-to-day running of schemes, new power connections
Problems with access have been noted from time to time. rural water supply.
One Time Settlement in coordination with Department of Power in respect of pending power bills of schemes.
A plan will be drawn up in principle.
44. With regard to replenishment and other conservation activities of existing resources:
Existing water sources in the village e.g. Strengthening of wells, Vindhan wells
To do this, the local self-government organization has implemented various schemes of the government and the village is geo-secret.
Efforts should be made to increase water storage. Long-term sources of water supply schemes
Resource strengthening measures such as recharge shafts in line with usage, water conservation works
Pages 49 to 42
# Page 43
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
From the funds available from the "VBG Ramji" and other schemes, as well as other such schemes.
These tasks should be done through convergence.
Community involvement:
Community involvement in operation, maintenance, and repair of water supply systems by the relevant committee.
must be ensured. water conservation practices and wastewater by involving them in the decision-making process.
Scientific disposal of human excreta in toilets, for water pollution control.
should be encouraged. with the community to discuss the efficiency of the water supply system.
Meetings should be held regularly. In this meeting, awareness generation of beneficiaries (IEC), about reforms were held.
Taking their feedback, community-based water conservation to ensure sustainable use of water resources
Information should be given about promoting practices. Especially in relation to women's water management.
The program should be designed to have a central role. Social audit at village level.
be implemented so as to maintain and repair the tap water supply schemes of the villagers.
There will be greater involvement in the regulation of fund utilization, grievance redressal systems, etc.
Desalination plant of sea water:
Maharashtra has about 720 km. There is a long beach. Therefore, a large number of
Sea water is available. Techniques for making potable water by separating salts from seawater
It has been developed and has provided a distinct source of fresh water. So
The technical and financial viability of the desalination plant can be checked by setting up such a system.
Water can be used to provide potable water to the citizens.
Grid water supply:
Drinking water scarcity in the drought-hit areas of Marathwada is seen during the summer. As well,
It has also been observed that many dams in Marathwada do not have an equal storage of water. So
Through grid concept from the water storage capacity of Nathsagar, Paithan and other dams in Marathwada.
The government is implementing plans to provide water to the catchment areas.
Similarly, it is also considered for the rest of the state by examining the technical feasibility as per the requirement.
will be done.
43 out of 49 pages
# Page 44
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
48. Control and Review:
48.1 Chief Executive Officer, Zilla Parishad:
The CEO of the concerned district, Zilla Parishad, is responsible for the District Water and Sanitation Mission.
Co-Chairperson and Zila Parishad of Jal Jeevan Mission and overall rural water supply programme.
Accordingly, micro-authorities and enforcement mechanisms at the field level are key. Maharashtra State Rural
In line with the implementation of the Drinking Water Policy 2025, the CEO, Zilla Parishad
Various Divisions of Zilla Parishad, Maharashtra Life Authority, Ground Water Surveillance and Development System,
Department of Water Resources, Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Limited (MSEDCL), Maharashtra Pollution Control
Board, Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation, Soil and Water Conservation Department and others related to the subject.
An annual action plan of the departments should be prepared by the respective departments. Sadar
A review meeting should be held at least every two months for the implementation of the plan.
Groundwater Surveillance and Development Systems in these meetings to prepare ground water table maps, based on which the ground water
Preparation and implementation of development plans for resource replenishment / resource renewal.
Review the plan, etc. Field Level Day-to-day Maintenance Repair of Water Supply Schemes
Provide guidance on systems, equipment, manpower, etc. Payment of electricity bills of the schemes and
Dues, the functioning of the Gram Panchayat and Taluka Level Maintenance and Repair Committees and their
Problems should be addressed from time to time. Department of Agriculture and Department of Water Conservation
Soil / water conservation works, along with Jalukt Shivar, MGNREGA, social forestry and other water conservation
The relevant schemes should be used effectively. Pollution Control Plan of the Pollution Control Board
Implementation, water pollution caused by industries outside the jurisdiction of the Industrial Development Corporation, maintenance
Setting up of other financial resources in line with the Repair Fund, Proposals for Viability Gap Funding, etc.
The matter should be reviewed and directions issued to the concerned and the report of the meeting should be submitted from time to time.
be submitted to the government.
48.2 Collectors:
Since the District Collector of the concerned district is the "Chairman of the District Water and Sanitation Mission" concerned,
He is also the Chairman of various Subject Committees at the district level for rural drinking water.
In line with the policy on water supply and sanitation, he coordinated the control and management of the systems.
A review meeting of all the officers mentioned in the relevant policy is held at least every three months of the year.
The meetings will include a demonstration of rural water supply schemes, their day-to-day maintenance and repair.
Electricity payments of schemes, household sewage and sewerage in rural areas, industrial pollution, in agriculture
44 out of 49 pages
# Page 45
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
Adverse effects on water caused by overuse of chemical fertilizers / pesticides / drugs, etc.
Pollution of water sources caused by industries outside the jurisdiction of the Industrial Development Corporation.
Pollution is a representative factor as well as factors that contribute to rural water supply and drinking water.
Review of the action plan to the relevant agencies with regard to all matters which may affect the water resources.
Instructions should be given to prepare. In all the above-mentioned matters, the concerned zonal officer shall be informed.
Action plans / measures in this regard through all concerned agencies by inviting them for the meeting.
The Collector should review the compliance and issue directions to the concerned.
Action of the concerned mechanisms / departments with emphasis on convergence of schemes.
Make sure that the plans are being implemented.
48.3व Divisional Commissioner:
The concerned Divisional Commissioner shall appoint all the Collectors and CEOs of the Division.
In his monthly review meeting, the work done on the subject of rural water supply and sanitation was given.
Review the directions received and their implementation, meeting reports from time to time. the supply of water and
Review meeting twice a year district-wise as required considering the seriousness of the sanitation issue.
Give directions as needed.
Regular reports and documentation:
Maintenance of water supply schemes by village committees, taluka committees and district committees.
Standards and parameters for repair and proper operation are recorded in the prescribed format.
Preparation of reports for monthly / quarterly / annual periods, as well as such reports by the competent authority-
It will need to be submitted to the senior office with a signature. List of all such reports
The water supply schemes that come under the cell have been integrated and studied at the level of the cell.
Operations and performance will be assessed. to make the necessary corrections.
Level Maintenance Correctional Cell either by the Government or by the Committee at the senior level as the case may be.
Instructions will be given. Records of maintenance repairs to the plan, such as the pump's logbook,
Turmeric and chlorine usage registers, tank filling and tank discharge registers, scheme
Register of leakage and repair of the waterway and distribution system, Register of monthly maintenance repair,
Daily Water Harvesting and Water Distribution Register, Monthly Charging and Recovery by Household and Customer-wise
Register, etc. Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organization (CPHEEO)
The responsibility of keeping it as per the manual will be incumbent on the concerned Maintenance Corrections Committee. The above-mentioned
An order / app will be created by the government to collect and disseminate all the information.
45 out of 49 pages
# Page 46
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
50. Regulatory Compliance:
Regulatory compliance to ensure sustainable management and efficient distribution of water resources
(Regulatory compliance) is mandatory. Prevalence of rural water supply and wastewater management
Compliance with regulations, prevention of water theft, control of unauthorized connections, among the prevailing laws.
Punitive action based on provisions and audit of water supply services.
Local self-government institutions will be responsible for compliance with transparent governance, etc.
Accordingly, the Indian Penal Code (2013), the Indian Civil Protection Code (2023), as required,
Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act (1984), Environment Protection Act (1986), Water Pollution
(Prevention and Control) Act (1974), Ground Water Act, Disaster Management Act (2005), etc.
In taking action against the culprits by the concerned local bodies on the basis of the provisions of the laws.
It will come.
The Maharashtra Gram Panchayat Act and the rules to be issued by the State Government from time to time.
Necessary measures to be taken by Local Self-Government Institutions / Maharashtra Life Authority, subject to
It will be planned and publicized among the citizens and where necessary, supplemental.
Punitive and legal action will be taken. Information regarding this penal and legal action.
dissemination, as well as creating a positive attitude among the citizens in this regard, in addition to domestic,
Water supply to Zila Parishads for creating awareness and capacity building at the institutional level.
Measures should be taken on behalf of the department. Violation of one or more of the above mentioned matters
Responsibility to take action in accordance with applicable law if found to have done so.
The concerned Gram Sevak / Village Extension Officer will be there.
51. Law to prevent water theft in the State:
pollution, especially from drinking water sources, to prevent water theft in the state.
A law will be enacted by the Water Supply and Sanitation Department to prevent this.
52. Grievance Redressal Cell:
Improper charging, water while levying water tariff of rural tap water supply schemes
To redress complaints regarding payment as well as other grievances related to water supply under the scheme.
A system has to be created. Maharashtra for separate water supply schemes and regional water supply schemes.
Grievance Redressal Rooms have been set up at Jeevan Authority, Zilla Parishad and Gram Panchayat levels as follows:
should be done.
46 out of 49 pages
# Page 47
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Implementation mechanism   | The 1st Level                   | The 2nd Level                            | The 3rd Level                                                                   |
| Maharashtra Life Authority | the Executive Engineer          | the Superintending Engineer              | the Chief Engineer                                                              |
| the District Council       | Deputy Engineer, Zilla Parishad | Executive Engineer, (PP), Zilla Parishad | Project Director (PP), / Deputy Executive Officer (Water Supply) Zilla Parishad |
| Gram Panchayat             | Village servant                 | Junior / Branch Engineer, Water Supply   | Group Development Officer, Panchayat Samiti                                     |
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Complaints regarding water supply services by the Water Supply and Sanitation Department within the prescribed time period.
It needs to be resolved. Complaints received in the office for this, as well as from the Central Government and the State
Integrated Grievance Redressal System of the Government such as CPGRAMS, Our Government Website, etc.
The refunds received from the portal will be processed within the stipulated time. Grievance Redressal
Regular review of the system under our control by level II and III officers on the situation.
Ensure that complaints are addressed with the necessary directions.
53. Charter of Citizens and Right to Service Act:
The "Maharashtra Right to Public Service Guarantee Act 2015" enacted by the state
Guidelines for the provision of services by Government Departments under the Services Act, 2015.
Principles and rules have been formulated. Under this, Gram Panchayat, Zilla Parishad and Maharashtra Jeevan Authority
They have been given the responsibility of providing scheduled services on time. In order to comply with these rules
Periodic monitoring will be done by the Water Supply and Sanitation Department and a reporting system will be put in place accordingly.
will be set up.
Review of water supply policy:
The Maharashtra State Rural Drinking Water Policy 2026 comes into effect from the date of its publication in the gazette.
The policy will remain in effect until further notice. The policy is reviewed every 5 years.
will be done.
55. Schemes for local bodies / implementing agencies in line with water supply schemes.
Subsidies in the form of Viability Gap Funding as support for operations, as well as under policies
47 out of 49 pages
# Page 48
Government Decision No: Grapadho 2025 / P.No.185 / Papu-07
Own the funding plans required to implement the proposed measures -
The respective administrative divisions (Gram Panchayats / Zila Parishads for the schemes of the Department of Rural Development)
Department of Water Supply and Sanitation) to provide and distribute for the schemes of MGNREGA.
Approval is being given. The various components proposed under the policy such as M.G.
Subsidies in the form of Viability Gap Funding for schemes, as well as a variety of capital expenditures
Measures such as solarization of water supply schemes, water supply scheme management
At present, the fund is earmarked for implementation of the implementation of the use of latest technology, etc.
"Demand No. Y-02, (02) (16) Tap Water Supply Scheme - Maintenance available with the Department.
Grant-in-Aid (State Share) (Programme) 31, Subsidiary Grants (Non-Payment) Heading-2215
The title "2082" is being approved for use in this policy.
Every year, as required under this ledger, for the implementation of measures and components.
Financial provisions and appropriation of funds are being approved.
This Government decision is available on the website of the Government of Maharashtra www.maharashtra.gov.in.
# Page 49